amd's ryzen 9000 is a true generational
step forward I'm talking bigger level
one cache tsmc's new and improved 49m
finfet process and a double digigit IPC
uplift thanks to its Zen 5 architecture
and the best part they're claiming they
finally got a non x3d chip that can on
average beat their Giga Chad 5800 x3d
all while using less power as for
Intel well they're in the middle of an
absolute dump fire to the point where I
actually think the more interesting
question is whether team red can slay
themselves or whether you should just
skip this launch until they inevitably
come out with an x3d variant of these
ships that is so strong it makes me
forget
to to segue to our sponsor MSI need a
laptop msi's got you covered with their
summer sale event check out their sweet
deals on laptops like this cyborg 14
using the link in the video description
because of amd's staggered launch we're
only looking at the ryzen 5 9600 x and
ryzen 79700 x today compared to last gen
they boost slightly higher and level one
caches increased but the other caches
are otherwise untouched as our core
counts compared to last generation
however thanks to tsmc's manufacturing
process improvements AMD has managed to
pack an extra nearly 2 billion
transistors into these little guys about
26.2% too bad that wasn't enough
transistors starting with f123 we see
our previous generation x3d chips
leading the pack now AMD never claimed
that the 9700 X would be the new gaming
champ but what they did say is that it's
supposed to beat 5,000 series 3dv cash
chips in gaming on average we found that
the story was a bit more complicated
than that but we'll get to that later
for now I'm happy to tell you that our
new 9000 Series chips beat everything
else on the field except for Intel's
14900 K and let's be real I can't
personally tell the difference between
381 frames per second and 378 and I
certainly wouldn't want to deal with the
extra heat power consumption or cost
moving to a very CPU bound Esports title
in rocket League wow do these things
ever rip do I need over 800 frames per
second no but is it cool that our 9700x
is heads and tails about everything else
absolutely and the 9600 X isn't very far
behind now it's clear that any of the
CPUs we tested will do this job just
fine even our inexpensive 14100 F but if
you were looking for a generational gain
it's clear that they can be found like
in returnal where our 9700x wins again
not by much over amd's goed X 3D chips
but if we narrow in on the Apples to
Apples comparisons against the non x3d
predecessors we're looking looking at
gains of over
20% now considering these processors are
barely different when we compare the
spec tables and that they're using way
less power that is pretty dang
impressive and makes me very excited for
the inevitable x3d refresh of course
those aren't here yet and we haven't
finished painting a full picture of
these you might have noticed that most
of what we've tested so far has been at
low settings instead of ultra so let's
change it up a bit and look at maxed out
Total War Warhammer 3 this is still a
fairly CPU dependent game which is why
we chose it cuz we're testing CPUs but
you can see that once you start to turn
the details up things get pretty close
at the top of the charts to show you why
this matters we also ran this title at
low where you can see that the AMD CPUs
do pull further ahead but realistically
if you're spending this kind of money on
your CPU you're probably not going to be
running everything at low so it's worth
taking all of these results as what they
are an illustration of how much faster
these CPUs are in a completely non GPU
bottleneck scenario probably the most
interesting thing here though is our
little 14100 F that could just chugging
along down there but we'll come back to
that later first I want to talk about
our results from our x3d chips the 7800
x3d does typically beat the prior
generation 5800 x3d but not by as much
as you might think both in averages and
in all important 1% lows so if you're a
gamer realistically our recommendation
from 2 and 1/2 years ago hasn't really
changed other than that you might be
able to save yourself a buck with the
newer cheaper 5700 x3d we didn't
actually run the numbers on this chip
but it's only marginally slower than its
big brother and when paired with a
budget board and some ddr4 memory it is
an outstanding value x3d is weakness
however is in productivity and this is
where the fun begins intel was already
behind in huget bench Photoshop but now
AMD has increased their lead with a 10
plus% gain over their last gen 7000
series in handbreak our h264 results
were disappointing with the last
Generation ryzen 7 beating the new
hotness but av1 encoding is a whole
other story thanks to am5 switch to a
true 512-bit data path instead of double
pumping 256 we see a similar Improvement
on the 9600 X in blender but curiously
the 97 100x isn't going to give you a
reason to upgrade over last gen perhaps
it's not as
powerful as we thought it would be more
on that later and unfortunately that
trend of barely changing continues with
go do compile where we have some
marginal generational uplift on the
ryzen 7 and then slightly better results
on the ryzen 5 7zip is a tad better for
both in compression but then worse in
decompression and while cinebench does
see an improvement it's minimal so
what's going on here as it turns out a
lot of it has to do with the lower power
consumption that we mentioned earlier in
cinebench our 7700x consumes an average
of 144 Watts while the 9700x is steady
at 88 Watts that is almost a 40%
decrease in power consumption while
netting slightly more performance and
here in this part of Canada where power
is cheap it's hard to get too excited
about this kind of efficiency but for
other parts of the world you could save
so much on power you could treat
yourself to a PTM 7950 thermal pad from
LTT store.com and check this out sure
our 14700 K is streets ahead in terms of
raw numbers but it's using almost 250
Watts out of the box to get there that
is almost triple the power for just
under twice the score and if you toss
out those ecor we can see that in single
core testing on both the 97 and 9600 X
Intel is losing by a wide margin now
part of this could be because AMD seems
to be leaving some performance on the
table check this out in cinebench our
ryzen 7 refuses to reach the advertised
5.5 GHz boost clock capping out instead
at around 5.2 and I know what you're
thinking well that 5.5 is just a single
core boost it's just for gaming except
that on our ryzen 5 it does manage to
hit its maximum advertised boost across
all cores in multi shaded workloads not
all the time mind you but sometimes our
ryzen 7 doesn't seem to be defective it
hits 5.5 in games and even in other
stress tests like occt linpack and
outside of games it's using the same or
a similar power envelope to do so so
what gives here and I know what you're
thinking it's got to be cooling right
well here's the thing this might be
clear to some of you already but less
Watts means less heat so where AMD was
already crushing Intel now we're seeing
even better performance these chips run
so cool I'm talking a 22 drop on
average on the ryzen 7 and 16 on the
ryzen 5 so for anyone who hates seeing
High CPU temps AMD just dummied Intel
and did it efficiently so it's not
thermals what is it we'll get to it
first I want to talk about where this
efficiency uplift comes from it's
partially thanks to amd's new two aead
branch prediction this is going to be
really simplified down but here we go
let's say you're running a program and
that program is trying to get from point
A to point B without Branch prediction
at every fork in the road it has to stop
and figure out which way to go then go
down the right path with Branch
prediction your CPU can predict the path
ahead of time removing the need to stop
and think at each fork with two ahead
prediction the CPU is guessing the next
two steps and by dual porting the
instruction fetching AMD is is able to
basically check the guess work about
twice as quickly which speeds up the
entire process now there is still a
penalty if they get a prediction wrong
but it's not any worse than how they
were doing things before so it's all
gains baby so what's not to love here
well there are a few things we are not
getting the xdna 2 AI component that is
present in the strix point mobile
counterpart to these chips instead AMD
is claiming that the CPU can act as an
aii accelerator which
is a pretty honest takedown of the whole
AI frenzy that AMD themselves is
participating in but it could make a
slight difference down the line
especially for power consumption a
bigger issue for me though is that more
ryzen 9000 chips are coming but
everything AMD has announced is going to
be more expensive than what we're
looking at today which continues amd's
troubling trend of ignoring their ryzen
3 customers we also think that while
efficiency is exciting to the data
center folks who are eagerly awaiting
epic Turin with its Unthinkable 192 core
counts most desktop users might have
preferred to see AMD give these chips a
little more juice by default and it's
finally time to talk about the weirdness
that we observed we tested the 9700x
with PBO enabled and with its power set
to unlimited and what we found was that
it easily Drew over 140 Watts putting it
in the same neighborhood as its
predecessor in terms of power
consumption and resulting in some
measurable performance gains of course
though this is technically overclocking
and with the recent reliability issues
that have plagued Intel users I can
understand why some of you might shy
away from this so I guess what I'm
saying is I wish AMD had just officially
under warranty given these things more
juice so that we could reach those
advertised boost clocks across all
course like we did once we enabled PBO
also last thing the lowest tier am5 b840
motherboards that are supposedly
supposed to help make this platform more
affordable don't officially support PCI
E Gen 4 so if you do try to save a buck
on your motherboard you could end up
seriously limiting your graphics and
your storage bandwidth which just just
it's one more knife in the side of amd's
budget conscious
customers with that in mind we thought
it would be interesting to see how amd's
new offerings stack up against what you
can't buy from AMD right now a CPU that
costs less L than half as much money
fits in a cheaper board that does
support PCI Gen 4 and comes with a stock
cooler the results aren't amazing but
when you don't even have a competitor in
the weight class you kind of forfeit the
fight and Intel's 1400f puts up pretty
respectable results at less than half
the price now it struggles in
productivity and struggles even more in
CPU bound games but if you're on a
budget it's a pretty compelling value of
course though it's based on a platform
that has no future upgrade path and you
aren't saving that much compared to am4
which by the way AMD just released
another refresh 4 with the XT lineup and
they also confirmed that am5 is going to
be supported until at least 2027 in
conclusion then solid chips even better
if you're adventurous and turn on PBO
but not really for gamers so I'm kind of
more excited to see the matchup that's
coming then between the 9800x 3D and
Intel's AOL link which supposed is
dropping hyperthreading all together
huge move and I don't think anybody
knows what that's going to mean for
gaming performance as they go to a
purely big little architecture just like
nobody knows what on Earth would happen
if I didn't segue to today's sponsor
Squarespace tired of your online
presence looking like a geoc city's
nightmare we feel you instead of
dragging your feet on coding a site you
can literally just drag and drop designs
with Squarespace blueprint it's designed
to give you great layout and styling
options so you're website is optimized
for every device they also have
integrated optimized SEO tools that help
your site rank higher in search results
which means more people will find your
site easily Squarespace makes shopping
easy too they accept credit cards PayPal
and even Apple pay to give your
customers flexibility if you want to
give me money you do it any way you want
and of course we use Squarespace to
build our website too no more late
nights spend Googling why my website
broken Squarespace has 24/7 support to
help you build your dream website start
start building your website today and
receive 10% off your first purchase by
visiting squarespace.com
LTT if you guys enjoyed this video maybe
go check out our review of the 7800 x3d
somehow that chip and even its
predecessor are just killing it like
years later outstanding gaming CPUs